What does a commercial lawyer do?

Commercial lawyers have many duties, depending on their clients' needs.
Here are eight common duties of licenced commercial lawyers:

1. Representing clients in court

A commercial lawyer is a legal representative of a business or organisation and represents that organisation in a court of law. Should the business ever face legal charges, need to appeal before a judge or otherwise enter a courtroom, the commercial lawyer acts as their representative in defence and litigation. Representing a business in court can also mean the commercial lawyer is responsible for preparing court documents and petitioning on behalf of the client for further or reduced legal action. Commercial lawyers also advise their clients on how to best navigate a courtroom and the legal process.

2. Drafting legal documents

Commercial lawyers draft legal documents for businesses and organisations. These documents might include:

- Letter of demand
- Cease and desist letter
- Partnership agreement
- Privacy policy
- Business merger agreement
- Shareholders agreement

A commercial lawyer studies the law and interprets it in each document to fully protect the business and ensure it remains within compliance. The lawyer then drafts the document, reviewing it for accuracy, and collects any necessary signatures or supporting documents from the company executives. Lawyers often file these documents on behalf of their clients in the courtroom or via the government's online portal.

3. Anticipating legal concerns

Commercial lawyers advise organisations on potential legal concerns in specific industries or with specific practises. They help warn businesses when operations might fall outside the rule of law and present legal concerns for the company. They can also help companies draft internal policies to provide legal shelter for the business. For example, the company might draft an agreement between customers and the business that states no legal obligation for damages on behalf of the company. Commercial lawyers help the business plan ahead to avoid unnecessary costs or legal procedures.

4. Addressing legal problems

Should a business encounter legal troubles, the commercial lawyer acts as their representative and works to resolve legal issues on behalf of the business. For example, if the court fines a company for safety violations, the commercial lawyer may investigate the incident, gather the evidence on behalf of the company and submit an appeal for the fines. Lawyers help the company navigate through the legal process and advise them on the best course of action. The commercial lawyer typically forms a strong relationship with the company's executives during their tenure.

5. Negotiating with other businesses

Commercial lawyers often oversee the negotiation process or participate directly in the negotiation process between two businesses. As a representative of the business, the commercial lawyer can make decisions that are in the best interest of the company and negotiates to ensure the conditions meet business needs. The commercial lawyer may also serve as an advisor during the negotiation process, instead providing guidance on the business deal for the company's executives to ensure compliance and the best interests of the company. Certain processes may require a lawyer to be present during negotiations, and lawyers typically file the legal documents.

6. Studying new laws

Commercial lawyers study and interpret new commercial laws to provide advice and guidance for the business. For example, if the government enacts a new tariff law for international trade, the commercial lawyer may study the law and explain its meaning to the business executives. This requires lawyers to remain updated on the most current legal processes and new laws and to interpret them accordingly. Commercial lawyers also study the requirements for establishing or dissolving a business, which may change as new government requirements become law.

7. Ensuring business compliance

Commercial lawyers help businesses remain in compliance with regulatory standards. This can include legal standards for business operations, employee safety and compensation or environmental impact. Lawyers study compliance laws and explain them to executives. They also indicate the penalties for non-compliance and help businesses stay updated with paperwork or filings for compliance laws. For example, a company may need to submit safety inspection reports once per year to remain in compliance with regulatory safety standards. Lawyers can help facilitate the process by making the laws easier to understand, drafting paperwork and filing with regulatory agencies.

8. Protecting business property and assets

Commercial lawyers also help businesses protect their assets and property. For example, commercial lawyers often study intellectual property law, which dictates the rights a company has to any content that comes from the creative mind, such as logos or graphics or other media. This is important to a business because intellectual property laws protect business ideas and assets from theft or impersonation, which can be costly. Lawyers help businesses follow intellectual property and asset laws and seek litigation for other companies that violate them and threaten the company.

What is a commercial lawyer?

A commercial lawyer is a professional who practises commercial law. Commercial law is a division of civil law, and deals with business operations such as trade, sales, hiring and firing, intellectual property and the business structure. Commercial lawyers represent the company and act in its best interests, helping the business follow the laws and maintain compliance with any government bodies.